New blog: Spinning Up a 3-Node MongoDB Replica Set in 5 Minutes (#133)
openeverest/openeverest.github.io: content/blog/mongodb-replica-set-5-minutes/index.md

---
title: "Spinning Up a 3-Node MongoDB Replica Set in 5 Minutes"
date: 2026-08-20T10:00:00
draft: false
image:
    url: mongodb-cover.png

    attribution:
authors:
 - HamidKhan1001
tags:
 - mongodb
 - replica-set
 - kubernetes
 - tutorial
 - openeverest
 - v2
summary: How fast can you get a 3-node MongoDB replica set running on Kubernetes? I timed it with a 5-minute countdown. Here is what happened.
---

Getting a MongoDB replica set running on Kubernetes is one of those things that looks
straightforward until you are actually doing it. You need a StatefulSet with stable

> network identities, a headless Service so the pods can resolve each other by DNS,

Reviewer: what does "network identities" mean?

PersistentVolumeClaims that survive pod restarts, and then once all three pods are up
you still have to shell into the primary and run `rs.initiate()` with a hand-crafted
member list that matches your pod hostnames exactly. Miss any of it and MongoDB starts

> as a standalone instance with no errors, which is a fun way to lose writes silently.

Reviewer: what writes are going to be lost?

I wanted to see how much of that OpenEverest v2 would handle on its own. The MongoDB

> provider sits on top of the Percona Server for MongoDB Operator, so it is not

Reviewer: please call it Percona Operator for MongoDB and put a link to it here

reimplementing replica set coordination from scratch. OpenEverest's job is
orchestration: you describe what you want in an `Instance` spec and it figures out the
StatefulSet, headless service, PVC templates, replica set bootstrap, and credential
management. The question was whether that abstraction actually held up, or whether you

> still had to go poke at things manually.

Reviewer: That is wrong. OpenEverest just creates the Instance, everything else is handled by the operator

Everything here ran on a local `kind` cluster. No cloud, no pre-existing installation,
just a fresh cluster and a 5-minute timer.

**Environment:** kind v0.30.0 (4 nodes: 1 control-plane + 3 workers), kubectl v1.32.2,
Helm v3.19.0, OpenEverest **v2.0.0-dev.2**, `provider-percona-server-mongodb` **v0.1.0**.

## 1. Deploying Core Components and the Provider

> OpenEverest v2 splits into two parts: the core control plane and provider charts that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenEverest v2 is split into two parts: the core control plane and provider charts that
```

add support for specific databases. You install them separately.

Add the chart repo and install the core:

```bash
helm repo add openeverest https://openeverest.github.io/helm-charts/
helm repo update
helm install everest-core openeverest/openeverest \
    --devel --version "2.0.0-dev.2" \
    --namespace everest-system --create-namespace
```

Wait until all three pods are Running:

```
NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
everest-controller-77c7b89cd8-rqlts        1/1     Running   0          4m31s
everest-core-plugin-hub-6b5dbb49c4-bcgdc   1/1     Running   0          4m31s
everest-server-748d76868f-fqkpm            1/1     Running   0          4m31s
```

> Then install the MongoDB provider:

Reviewer: i would be consistent

```suggestion
Then install the provider for MongoDB:
```

```bash
helm install provider-percona-server-mongodb \
    oci://ghcr.io/openeverest/charts/provider-percona-server-mongodb \
    --version 0.1.0 -n everest-system
```

Once the provider registers, MongoDB shows up as an option in the UI. That is the
signal that everything is wired up and you can create a cluster.

![OpenEverest UI showing the Create database dropdown with MongoDB available as an option](provider-registered.png)

## 2. Defining the Cluster

I set the 5-minute timer and hit Create. The Resources step is where you pick node
count and size: 3 nodes, 1 CPU, 1 GB RAM, 3 Gi disk each.

> ![OpenEverest database creation UI showing 3 nodes selected, 1 CPU and 1 GB per node, with the 5-minute countdown timer running](db-create-ui.png)

Reviewer: that is v1 screenshot.

If you prefer YAML over clicking through the wizard, the equivalent spec is:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.openeverest.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instance
metadata:
  name: mongodb-2sh
  namespace: everest
spec:
  providerRef:
    name: provider-percona-server-mongodb
  topology:
    type: cluster
  components:
    engine:
      type: mongodb
      version: "8.0.19-7"
      replicas: 3
      resources:
        requests: { cpu: "1", memory: "1Gi" }
      storage:
        size: 3Gi
```

The `topology: cluster` field is what tells the provider you want a replica set rather
than a standalone instance. The provider translates that into a `PerconaServerMongoDB`
custom resource with the correct replica set name, member configuration, and anti-affinity
rules. You never touch any of that directly.

## 3. Watching It Come Up

The instance moves to `Initializing` while the operator provisions PVCs and schedules
pods:

> ![OpenEverest UI showing mongodb-2sh in Initializing state, 3 nodes, namespace everest](cluster-initializing.png)

Reviewer: that is v2 screenshot

    --eval "rs.status().members.map(function(m){ return m.name + ' | ' + m.stateStr })"
```

```
mongodb-2sh-rs0-0.mongodb-2sh-rs0.everest.svc.cluster.local:27017 | PRIMARY
mongodb-2sh-rs0-1.mongodb-2sh-rs0.everest.svc.cluster.local:27017 | SECONDARY
mongodb-2sh-rs0-2.mongodb-2sh-rs0.everest.svc.cluster.local:27017 | SECONDARY
```

![Terminal output showing rs.status() with rs0-0 as PRIMARY and rs0-1, rs0-2 as SECONDARY](rs-status-before.png)

One primary, two secondaries, replication lag at zero. The UI confirms the same: status flips to **Up** with all 3 nodes healthy.

![OpenEverest UI showing mongodb-2sh with status Up, 3 nodes, namespace everest](cluster-active.png)

Total time from hitting Create to a verified, replicating cluster: **under 5 minutes.**
The timer on that second screenshot tells the story.

## 5. Failover Test

"Pods are Running" and a green UI are not proof of HA. So I forced an election by
stepping down the primary:

```bash
# rs0-0 was primary before this
$ kubectl exec -n everest mongodb-2sh-rs0-0 -c mongod -- \
    mongosh -u clusterAdmin --authenticationDatabase admin \
    --eval "rs.stepDown()"

> { ok: 1 }

Reviewer: that is a weird way to test HA

```

Checked member states a few seconds later:

```bash
$ kubectl exec -n everest mongodb-2sh-rs0-0 -c mongod -- \
    mongosh -u clusterAdmin --authenticationDatabase admin \
    --eval "rs.status().members.map(function(m){ return m.name + ' | ' + m.stateStr })"
```

```
mongodb-2sh-rs0-0.mongodb-2sh-rs0.everest.svc.cluster.local:27017 | SECONDARY
mongodb-2sh-rs0-1.mongodb-2sh-rs0.everest.svc.cluster.local:27017 | PRIMARY
mongodb-2sh-rs0-2.mongodb-2sh-rs0.everest.svc.cluster.local:27017 | SECONDARY
```

> ![Terminal output showing rs.status() after stepDown with rs0-1 now elected as PRIMARY](rs-status-after.png)

Reviewer: why would you do the screenshot of the terminal instead of putting it into the code block?

`rs0-1` won the election and took over as primary. The stepdown and election resolved
in under 5 seconds, fast enough that by the time I ran the status check it had already
settled. No manual intervention, no connection string change needed. The replica set
handled it on its own.

## Takeaway

The parts that usually eat the most time when doing this manually, getting the headless
service DNS right, crafting the `rs.initiate()` payload, setting up credentials, were
all handled without any extra input. From a blank `kind` cluster to a verified,
replicating MongoDB cluster with a tested failover: under 5 minutes.

> To be clear, this is a dev setup. No TLS, no authentication hardening

Reviewer: This is wrong. Percona's operator by default has TLS enabled.

beyond generated credentials, and local `kind` storage means the anti-affinity rules do

> not actually spread pods across real nodes. For production you would want TLS through

Reviewer: I'm not sure how storage and affinity relate to each other.
